
--- PÁGINA 1 ---
From 30 April 2024, new post-Brexit import checks will add fees onto certain imported
goods, with data from Allianz Trade suggesting it could cost UK SMEs up to £2bn.
Back to Knowledge centre
FOOD AND HOSPITALITY SMALL BUSINESS NEWS
New Brexit charges could cost SMEs
£2bn
4-minute read
Written by
Zach Hayward-Jones
29 April 2024
|


--- PÁGINA 2 ---
With food and plant products being hit hardest by the charges, some businesses could be
disproportionately aﬀected. Read on to ﬁnd out what’s changing, if your business will be
aﬀected, and how much it’s likely to cost you.
New Brexit import checks – what’s changing?
Ever since we left the European Union (EU), the UK has dealt with increased import and
export fees as well as supply chain issues. So news of further regulation could be quite
concerning for small business owners.
What’s being introduced is a ‘common user charge’, which means there’ll be increased border
checks on high and medium-risk plant and food products imported from the EU. These
checks will add up to a maximum charge of £145 on each import.
There’s a government breakdown of the charges, explaining when they apply and how they’re
calculated. There’s an extensive list of what’s considered medium and high-risk, but common
items include:
eggs
live trees
plants
milk
meat and certain ﬁsh products
What impact will this have on small
businesses?
While a potential £145 bill doesn’t sound too expensive, it has the potential to hit small
businesses hard. The cost of running a business has risen sharply over the last few years with
energy prices and inﬂation aﬀecting proﬁts for many. An extra fee every time you import
these products from the EU could reduce margins further.
The Head of Trade Policy at the British Chambers of Commerce, William Bain, was critical of
the new charge, saying: “A ﬂat rate fee for bringing most animal and plant products into the

--- PÁGINA 3 ---
UK is a hammer blow for small and medium-sized importers. It’s also deeply concerning for
retailers, cafes and restaurants.”
Highlighting the point that certain business sectors will be disproportionately aﬀected by this
fee, with hospitality being the clearest example. But the eﬀects could be broader.
Fears grow over rising food costs
According to the report from Allianz Trade, high and medium-risk plant and food products
make up three per cent of all UK imports. Increased checks on a large section of imports
could lead to supply chain issues as well as higher food costs.
Phil Pluck, the Chief Executive of the Cold Chain Federation said: “Our main concern is that
this is now certain to negatively aﬀect food prices… UK importers of medium and high-risk
goods will have to pass this cost on to either the EU importer, the smaller UK retailer, or the
UK consumer.
“Ultimately, this will increase business costs and food prices and potentially lower choices for
the shopper,” he added.
One of the outcomes of higher import fees is that small businesses might reconsider their
current supply chain and include more UK-based suppliers to avoid extra fees.
Industry warns of “huge new cost burden”
Figures from the gardening and hospitality industry have been critical of the new charges,
claiming that the government has prioritised regulation over UK businesses.
James Barnes, the Chairman of the Horticultural Trades Association, shared his thoughts:
“This will be a huge new cost burden for many, hitting SMEs hard… the charges will
undoubtedly increase costs, potentially reduce consumer choice, and increase the likelihood
of empty shelves.”
A government spokesperson defended the checks, saying: “Our world-class border facilities
will provide essential biosecurity checks to protect our food supply, farmers and environment
against costly disease outbreaks entering the UK through the short straits.
“The charges follow extensive consultation with industry and a cap has been set speciﬁcally
to help smaller businesses. We are committed to supporting businesses of all sizes and across

--- PÁGINA 4 ---
all sectors as they adapt to new border checks and maintaining the smooth ﬂow of imported
goods.”
The government is phasing in these checks over the next 12 months to reduce the impact on
small businesses and supply chains.
More useful guides for business owners
How to register a business name – and how to protect it
The ultimate guide to growing your small business
Small business grants – everything you need to know
What is public liability insurance?
pixs:sell/stock.adobe.com
Read more articles like this:
Ready to set up your cover?
As one of the UK’s biggest business insurance providers, we specialise in public liability
insurance and protect more trades than anybody else. Why not take a look now and
build a quick, tailored quote?
Start your quote
